blogpost: Optimizing the code intelligence commit graph (#2431)
sourcegraph/about: blogposts/2021/optimizing-a-code-intelligence-commit-graph-1.md

---
title: "Optimizing a code intelligence commit graph (Part 1)"
author: Eric Fritz
authorUrl: https://eric-fritz.com

> description: "Read about our journey to enabling Sourcegraph to respond to requests on commits missing an index quickly, with precise results."

Reviewer: @efritz I took a stab at a description (this appears on the card on /blog and when the post is shared on social). Feel free to edit if this doesn't capture it for you!

Author: ```suggestion
description: "We enabled Sourcegraph to respond to requests for commits missing a code intelligence index quickly and with precise results. Read about our journey."
```

There were a lot of _to_ back to back so I reworded it a bit. How does this sound?

> publishDate: 2021-05-24T18:00-07:00

Reviewer: ```suggestion
publishDate: 2021-05-26T18:00-07:00
```

tags: [blog]
slug: optimizing-a-code-intel-commit-graph
heroImage: /blog/optimizing-code-intelligence-commit-graph.png
socialImage: /blog/optimizing-code-intelligence-commit-graph.png
published: true
---

![Optimizing code intelligence commit graph graphic](/blog/optimizing-code-intelligence-commit-graph.png)

> Sourcegraph's [Code Intelligence](https://about.sourcegraph.com/handbook/engineering/code-intelligence) team builds tools and services that provide contextual information around code. These enable users to perform fast, comprehensive, and accurate code navigation, to surface dependency relationships across projects, repositories, and languages, and to index and keep code up to date across all languages. In this post I'll dive into how Sourcegraph can resolve code intelligence queries using data from older commits when data on the requested commit is not yet available. In Part 2 I'll cover how we tackled scalability of this feature. 

Reviewer: @efritz I added this to contextualize for people who might read the post who haven't yet heard of SG. Feel free to shorten/tweak

Author: ```suggestion
Sourcegraph's [Code Intelligence](https://about.sourcegraph.com/handbook/engineering/code-intelligence) team builds tools and services that provide contextual information around code. These enable users to perform fast, comprehensive, and accurate code navigation, and to surface dependency relationships across projects, repositories, and languages. In this post I'll dive into how Sourcegraph can resolve code intelligence queries using data from older commits when data on the requested commit is not yet available. In Part 2, we'll cover how additional scalability concerns presented themselves and how we tackled them.
```

<figure id="query-plan">
  <img src="https://sourcegraphstatic.com/blog/commit-graph-optimizations/slow.png" alt="Slow query plan"/>
  <figcaption>Query plan of a commit graph traversal visiting 100 commits.</figcaption>
</figure>

[Adding additional indexes](https://github.com/sourcegraph/sourcegraph/pull/5946) to the `commits` table helped a bit, but did not fundamentally change the performance characteristics of the query. An even larger pathology was discovered in repositories with a large number of merge commits. In order to understand the performance issue, it's important first to understand how the recursive query evaluation works in the case of duplicates, which was initially unintuitive to us. Paraphrasing the [PostgreSQL documentation](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/13/queries-with.html), recursive queries are evaluated with the following steps (emphasis ours):

1. Evaluate the non-recursive term and **discard duplicate rows**
1. Insert rows into result set as well as a temporary working table
1. While the working table is not empty:
    1. Evaluate the recursive term by substituting the recursive self-reference with the working table and **discard duplicate rows**

>     1. Insert rows into result set as well as a new temporary intermediate table table

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    1. Insert rows into result set as well as a new temporary intermediate table
```
I think this is a typo!

<figure>
  <img src="https://sourcegraphstatic.com/blog/commit-graph-optimizations/super-fast.png" alt="Super fast query plan"/>
  <figcaption>Query plan of an optimized commit graph traversal visiting 100 commits.</figcaption>
</figure>

Even though we're now executing a greater number of steps, each step can be evaluated efficiently. The old, inefficient index scan has been broken into 2 different index scans: one that traverses the ancestor direction, and another that traverses the descendant direction. The simple conditionals in each query can be evaluated _without an index filter_ by each of the multicolumn indexes above. Instead of pulling back the entire commit graph on each iteration of the table expression, we pull exactly the set of rows that need to be added to the working table.

This change makes the query efficient enough that we no longer have to worry about caching results, as running it on every request only contributes a negligible amount of time. Thus solving the problem [once and for all](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IjmtVKOAHPM)!

## Lessons learned

> Firstly, I spoke too soon as there wouldn't be a Part 2 if we _had_ solved the problem once and for all. Secondly, sometimes the more complex the query, the more efficient it is. And lastly, the cliché holds: computers do what you tell them to. When debugging this is usually a good place to start.

Reviewer: @efritz I'm putting words in your mouth here (did I butcher the joke??) so again feel free to edit or flesh out as you see fit 😁 It's a little abrupt as is because I'm out of my depth 😆

Author: ```suggestion
One major take away for us was the concrete reinforcement that databases are a hugely deep subject, but are not magic. Building and maintaining an accurate mental model of how your tools work seems to be a necessary skill in software engineering, and acting with poor mental models can lead to disastrous performance results (at best).

Another major takeaway is that the cliché holds: computers do what you tell them to and nothing more. When debugging correctness and performance issues, it's good to _shed_ your previous mental model and re-assess its correctness as you dive deeper into your stack.
```

title: "Optimizing a code intelligence commit graph (Part 1)"
author: Eric Fritz
authorUrl: https://eric-fritz.com
description: "Read about our journey to enabling Sourcegraph to respond to requests on commits missing an index quickly, with precise results."
publishDate: 2021-05-24T18:00-07:00
tags: [blog]
slug: optimizing-a-code-intel-commit-graph
heroImage: /blog/optimizing-code-intelligence-commit-graph.png

> socialImage: /blog/optimizing-code-intelligence-commit-graph.png

Reviewer: @efritz Thanks for letting me know. I thought this was a small enough image that it'd be ok (going by https://about.sourcegraph.com/handbook/marketing/creating_blog_posts#adding-images) but if I'm honest it's mainly because I haven't yet tackled how to upload to the bucket 🙈

> socialImage: /blog/optimizing-code-intelligence-commit-graph.png

Author: Yeah small images are fine. I think this is something we should add some additional dev tooling around (have a marketing cli tool that uploads images from your machine, other common tasks). I'm just mentioning it because it was easy to flag here, no action necessary on this one :)

  <figcaption>Query plan of an optimized commit graph traversal visiting 100 commits.</figcaption>
</figure>

Even though we're now executing a greater number of steps, each step can be evaluated efficiently. The old, inefficient index scan has been broken into 2 different index scans: one that traverses the ancestor direction, and another that traverses the descendant direction. The simple conditionals in each query can be evaluated _without an index filter_ by each of the multicolumn indexes above. Instead of pulling back the entire commit graph on each iteration of the table expression, we pull exactly the set of rows that need to be added to the working table.

This change makes the query efficient enough that we no longer have to worry about caching results, as running it on every request only contributes a negligible amount of time. Thus solving the problem [once and for all](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IjmtVKOAHPM)!

> ## Lessons learned

Author: ```suggestion
Well, it solved the problem once and for all _at a particular scale_.

## Lessons learned
```
